[voices speaking Sangheili]
[Sangheili speech continues]
[heavy, metallic thud]
This is the recording
from Sanctuary.
- [John] What is it?
- [Perez] A prayer.
- [woman] Stand down!
- [John] Where is COBALT Team?
[Perez] "I bring you blessings,
people of Reach."
John-117 is relieved
from active duty,
and will be confined to barracks
till such time
as he clears
a psychiatric evaluation.
They changed it!
[Perez] "Know that
I have come without mercy."
Do you have concerns
about John's mental state?
All of my simulations
return the same result,
regardless of any action taken.
So there's nothing to be done.
[Perez] "Without pity."
[Ackerson] The Covenant element
hit COBALT Team days ago.
We can assume the
Covenant Fleet isn't far behind.
- We're not gonna fight.
- We're going to fight.
We're just not going to win.
Essential assets are being
transported off the planet
as we speak.
Can I count on you?
[Perez] "Know that I am the
instrument of your extinction."
I need to speak
with Corporal Perez.
[Perez]
"I bring this planet forth
as a burnt offering.
[whoosh]
Upon this altar,
I place the head of the Demon."
[Riz] You said there
were other ways to live.
[Louis-036] That's right.
Like what?
[Perez] "And consecrate
the Great Journey of my people.
Know that I am Var 'Gatanai.
Know that I am Death."
They're already here.
Aren't they?
[rumbling, explosion]
Ooh.
Got a little
late-night supper here.
Hello, Benny. Uh, Jenny.
Hello, Lenny.
[cooing]
Keith.
Whoa, whoa, whoa. Settle down.
What's up with you guys?
- There's enough for everyone.
- [explosion]
[indistinct shouting]
[Perez]
Go inside! Go inside!
- This way.
- I need to get home!
- [explosion]
- [screaming]
[indistinct shouting]
[John] Perez!
I need to see my family.
No, come on.
[Perez grunting]
- I need to get to my family!
- Hey!
Corporal! They're gone.
Let me go!
I need to see my family!
- [artillery fire]
- [screams]
Come on! Come on!
This way! Come on!
[screams and explosions]
[explosions and gunfire]
[opening theme plays]
[low rumble; cup rattling]
Don't try to tell me
you didn't feel that one.
[indefinite rumble above]
Something's going on out there.
You're aware there's a war?
In the outer colonies.
Well, that's the thing
about war.
It never stays
where you put it.
[distant rumbling]
It is good to see you, Soren.
To know you're still alive.
- I don't know what to say.
- Well, that's unlike you.
How would you know?
I've played this over in my head
a thousand times.
What to say.
How to say it.
What I would do if I were ever
in the same room with you again.
And?
You're smaller than I remember.
- [artillery explosions rumble]
- [gasps]
[Soren] There's your upside.
The field perimeter
may still be charged.
It's more than enough
to kill you, Soren!
See you around.
[Perez]
What about these people?
- We have to tell them.
- [John] No time.
[soft sobs]
Focus on the mission.
Stay alert. Do your job.
Those weren't Marines, okay?
This was my family! My friends!
There's no training for this.
Do you get it?
Do you?
I need to get back to FLEETCOM.
Find my gear.
Link up with
the defensive force.
You don't have to come.
[indistinct PA announcement]
[breathing heavily]
[indistinct chatter]
Keep moving.
- We need to get out of here.
- What?
They're coming.
You need to get out of here.
You need to get out of here!
It's not safe!
You gotta leave, come on!
You need to get out of here!
- You need to get out of here.
- Perez!
FLEETCOM. Now.
- They need to know. They need--
- No.
[indistinct shouting]
- Hey!
- [screams]
[window smashes]
[grunts]
[growls]
[metal clatters]
[both grunt]
[Perez yells]
[yells]
[Perez] Chief!
[civilians screaming
and shouting]
[John] This way! Come on!
[alarm beeping]
If you want to get out,
it's this way.
I know this place. Trust me.
That's not gonna happen.
Suit yourself.
Shit.
- [artillery fire]
- [distant screaming]
[explosions]
- [panting]
- Come on!
In here.
[door closes]
- [whispers] Are they coming?
- [shushes]
[deep voices speaking
indistinctly]
Relax.
You relax.
I watch you.
All that plasma flying.
Death all around you and...
you never...
When I was a kid,
there was this woman.
She flipped a coin.
She dared me to call it,
and I did.
Heads.
Eleven times in a row.
- Lucky.
- Maybe.
But I wasn't guessing.
I knew.
It's always been like that.
Every time I go into battle,
I know I can lose somebody.
I know it's not gonna be me.
Must be nice.
Not really.
[glass shatters]
Shh.
- [gunshot]
- [Perez gasps]
[Perez] Shit.
Oh. Please be careful with that.
[John] Ma'am?
That axe is over 600 years old.
Someone on Earth
cut trees with it.
Used the wood for fuel.
You. Big man.
That typewriter.
It's too heavy for me.
Ma'am, the city's under attack.
You don't say.
Well, be useful.
The typewriter, up there.
You need to get out of here.
[Jade] This is my shop.
Same place for 40 years,
give or take.
Look, top shelf, please.
[John]
The corporal's right, ma'am.
This location is not secure.
We're on our way to FLEETCOM.
We can take you with us.
And who'll look after
all my stuff?
Ma'am, all of this
doesn't matter.
That's an Underwood
standard portable.
Twentieth century.
Hartford, Connecticut.
That's Earth, dear.
It's seen six wars.
Fought communism, fascism,
all the isms in between.
And it survived.
Now, if that doesn't matter...
The Covenant is
on the way, ma'am.
People nowadays
talk like nothing matters.
Who are we?
If nothing matters,
then we don't matter.
Ma'am, they're gonna
glass the planet.
Nothing will survive.
You will not survive.
Do you understand?
- Ma'am, do you understand?
- She understands.
Come.
- [artillery explosions]
- [dirt sifts]
[door closes]
What is this?
Your secret dungeon?
Incarceration is
a secondary purpose.
It's principally
an experimentation
and interrogation site.
ONI access only.
[sighs] So, like a dungeon.
[muffled explosion]
They're getting closer.
Tell me, what's Kessler like?
How old is he?
He must be 9 or 10?
- I bet he worships you.
- Stop.
When you were that age,
you were always
trying to slip away.
Climbing, tunneling.
I don't want to talk to you
about my son.
[Halsey] Well, that's what
parents talk about,
or so I'm told.
You had a child.
So, naturally, I'm curious
to know how much of you
has found its way into him.
My interest
is purely scientific.
Bullshit.
Do you even know
where we're headed?
Yes, of course I do.
I remember...
you were the most driven.
The others had to be recruited.
- Kidnapped.
- But you wanted it.
Right from the very
first time I saw you.
You wanted to be a Spartan.
- I was 6.
- Yes, you were 6.
And you already knew
your purpose.
So did I.
You were a born warrior.
- Even after your accident, you--
- My what?
Your arm.
It was very difficult
to let you go.
Let me go?
I escaped you.
I survived you.
I made a life...
in spite of you.
Hmm.
I suppose that's
as good a story as any.
[softly]
Oh, shit.
Plasma.
Plasma?
- They're here.
- Take this.
And try not
to shoot me in the back.
No promises.
[machine-gun fire]
Stay low!
[man] Go, go, go!
[man screams]
- Go! Go!
Oh, my God.
[John] They're evacuating
people from FLEETCOM.
We're no good here.
- Go, go, go, go!
- [man] Hey!
- [explosion]
- [man screams]
Riz!
I hope you don't mind,
we got started without you!
- I need a weapon!
- Help yourself.
- You good?
- I am now.
Trying to get to FLEETCOM.
Ran into about 20 Elites.
They just keep coming.
Any contact
with the other units?
No, they took out
the comms first.
[Louis-036] I hear you.
Keep making that noise.
I'll find your ass.
We gotta move!
Any idea how we're gonna get
around this Covenant position?
We're not going around.
All right. Give me five Marines.
The rest of you are gonna
lay down cover fire
while we traverse to
the defilade by the bridgehead.
[Marines]
Yes, ma'am!
Once we get inside,
everybody else fall back!
[man] To where, sir?
Wherever you're needed.
Just not here.
[man]
Yes, sir!
- What do you think you're doing?
- I'm going with you.
- No, Louis, you're not.
- I don't need your permission.
I'm coming too.
I can help with the wounded.
Okay, let's go.
- Hey, you ready?
- On your go.
Cover fire! Ready? Go!
[Marine 1]
You and you with me!
[Marine 2] We got him!
Go! Go! Go!
[Riz] Come on! Keep moving!
Three o'clock!
[indistinct shouting]
[Danilo] Louis!
[Riz] Louis!
[Louis-036] Stay low! Move!
[John]
Move! Go! Go, go, go!
[gunfire]
[artillery explosions]
Moving! Let's go!
[all yell]
[roaring and snarling]
[Riz] Contact rear!
- [John] Reloading!
- [Riz] Covering.
- [snarling]
- Frag out!
[man screams]
[John] This way!
On me!
Go! Go! Go!
Go! Go! Go! Go!
[distant shouting and gunfire]
[pin clicks]
[grenade clatters]
[snarling]
[grunts]
[groans]
We gotta move. Let's go!
We're good.
Where's Danilo?
Riz! Where's Danilo?
[panting]
He's not coming.
- [John] Wraith!
- [Perez] Wraith!
[John] Get some cover fire!
- [Louis-036] Come on!
- [Riz] Louis!
[Louis-036]
You want this?
[John] Gotta move!
You'd better go.
Come with me.
No.
I'm right where I need to be.
[John] Go! Go! Go!
I'm right here!
[Riz] Louis!
[Louis-036]
Come on!
I got something for you!
No! Louis!
[impact grunt]
Riz.
We gotta go.
[Soren]
What the hell is this place?
[Halsey] We're not the only
prisoners here.
[Soren] I thought you said
you knew a way out of here.
[Halsey] Cortana?
- Dr. Halsey.
- Yes.
Run.
[ominous music]
[Soren] Get back!
[Halsey screams]
Move!
[grenade clatters]
[explosion]
[indistinct chatter]
[muffled screams]
Riz, get suited up.
Riz!
Let's go.
Hey, wait, wait, wait.
Is that it?
Are you just gonna go off
to fight
without saying anything?
Okay, well... thanks.
Corporal.
For luck.
Heads.
Sorry to ruin
your day off, Chief.
[chuckles]
Well, I'm happy to see you.
I've been clearing out
the lower levels.
Few of those cloaked Elites
snuck in
before the barricades went up.
I'm almost sick
of killing aliens.
Almost.
- Hey, Riz, you all right?
- Where's Kai?
I was gonna ask the same thing.
She must still be out there.
Well, if I know Kai,
she went hunting.
We should do the same.
We're just going
to get suited up.
The armor's gone, chief.
What did you say?
[Vannak]
Our suits. The armor.
- It's not there.
- Son of a bitch.
- Where's Ackerson?
- [Vannak] I don't know.
Command bugged out.
They took
high-ranking personnel.
- Valuable assets.
- They took our suits.
Chief, what the hell's going on?
Who's in command?
- Get us more kit.
- [Vannak] Roger that.
[indistinct chatter]
Reduce rate of the salvos,
buy us a little more time.
Copy that, sir.
[John] Admiral.
I want as many of those bastards
on the bridge as possible
before you blow it.
I'm on it, sir.
They took our suits.
You know, part of me was hoping
that you were dead,
so I wouldn't have to listen
to this "I told you so."
No such luck, sir.
Sorry, John.
You were right.
Cobalt was KIA at Visegrad.
I saw the bodies myself.
They never knew what hit them.
Two of their weapons
had full mags.
Didn't get a shot off.
When Visegrad went down,
it left a blind spot.
There's no way of knowing
how many Covenant landed.
It's a ground game for now.
They're hitting
the power stations.
We're defending the ones
that we can, but without them--
- MAC-array goes down.
- That's right.
No more orbital defense.
The Covenant fleet
can move into range.
- Then the glassing begins.
- That's about the size of it.
Tyrell, Scorpion
in the east hangar.
- Let's get it on the bridge.
- [Tyrell] Yes, sir.
What about our fleet?
Where are they?
I believe the determination
was made to preserve
our most essential
military assets.
What?
Just let Reach fall?
They knew this was gonna happen.
They saw it coming,
they did the math.
Who?
I don't know.
The powers that be.
The Admiralty. The ONI.
Take your pick.
- Ackerson?
- Yeah.
Doesn't change
the situation here.
Let me be clear John.
I don't give a shit about
their calculations.
I'm gonna make the Covenant pay
for every inch of this planet.
Our mission now is to evacuate
as many people as we can.
Where do you want me, sir?
We're creating a choke point.
We're outnumbered, but if we
can concentrate our forces--
I get it, sir.
Thermopylae.
[soft groan]
My ears.
[Soren] Grenades will do that.
Can I have my hand back?
What do you mean, you let me go?
Do you have any idea
what just happened in there?
Our enemy is in possession
of Cortana.
What did you mean?
I saw your potential.
Your strength, your focus.
They all looked to you.
John looked to you.
After your augmentation failed,
I needed him to look to himself.
No.
No, that's not what happened.
Why do you think there was
no one guarding the ships
the night you ran away?
[explosion and gunshots]
We need to get up there now!
[grim music plays]
[indistinct shouting]
Hey!
[medic] Hey!
Help me with that one!
[Perez] What do I do?
We've got to get these people
out of here.
Transports are leaving
from the upper hangar.
[woman] Right this way.
This way.
It's okay.
I got you.
[man] Clear the way!
Coming through! Coming through!
Clear the way!
[indistinct PA announcement]
John.
What are your orders, sir?
Hold my hat.
Gunny.
Attention all on deck!
Bring it in.
[Marine]
Front and center! Double time!
Move it!
You know what I see?
I see some hard-ass Marines.
What I do not see is doubt.
I do not see defeat
in this room.
And I do not see surrender.
[all] No, sir!
[Keyes]
When I look at your faces,
I see the very best
of who we are as a people.
You fought with courage.
You fought with heart.
You fought with love
for your brothers and sisters
in arms.
There's nothing left
for any one of you to prove.
You're the finest Marines
I've ever seen.
And you deserve the truth.
The enemy is at our gates.
Their numbers are overwhelming.
We will not be able
to hold them back forever.
Any Marine who makes
this stand with us...
will not survive the day.
But you will not
make that stand alone.
John?
It is my honor to introduce
to you John-117.
You know him as Master Chief.
[whispering]
Today, he needs no armor.
Today, all he needs
is the warrior inside of him.
And it's the same warrior
that's in each of you.
The one that is willing to lay
down your life for your home.
For every moment
that we hold the enemy at bay,
more innocent people
can escape on the transports.
And when they do,
they will go forth
and tell the story
that you write today.
You will be remembered
as the brave women and men
who laid down their lives
so that one day our children
may live without fear
of this monster we call war.
Now, show those scaly bastards
they fucked
with the wrong planet!
[cheers]
[sergeant] Fall out!
Take your positions!
[officer] Fall out! Formation!
[Marine] Semper fi!
[Keyes] I am glad you're here.
- Yes, sir.
- No, John.
It matters.
[sergeant]
Your comms, sir.
Comms, Admiral.
What are you doing?
What does it look
like I'm doing?
Stripes don't mean shit today.
- Get me my gun.
- [John] No, sir.
We can't afford to lose you.
This won't be the end.
There's more fight
to come after this.
We're gonna need good people
like you to lead us.
John, I'm still giving
the orders here.
[John] And we need you
to keep giving the orders,
or else it's gonna be people
like Ackerson.
Now please, get those civilians
out of here.
What about you?
I'm where I'm supposed to be.
[soft chuckle]
Make it count.
You bet your ass, sir.
Get this ammo
evenly distributed.
[shouting and gunfire]
- Right here, guys.
- [Marine 1] Yes, sir.
[Marine 2] Lock and load!
[John] Tyrell.
Got your fire team set?
Roger that, Master Chief.
- Fire team!
- All right, then.
[Tyrell]
Maintain your sectional fire!
[gunfire]
[indistinct radio chatter]
[John] Guns are out.
[Marine] Somebody get me
vis on that bridgehead!
[Vannak]
Here they come.
Hello, Jacob.
Catherine.
And...
Soren.
I hate to interrupt
whatever the hell this is,
but could either of you point me
in the quickest way
off this hellhole?
There's a civilian transport
leaving from the upper hangar.
[Soren] I'm a civilian.
You're a pirate.
Small business owner.
[distant gunfire]
[Vannak]
Where the hell are they?
Scorpion-Three X-Ray,
this is Silver-One.
[man, over radio]
Go ahead, Silver. Over.
Give me one round of white phos
on that bridgehead, over.
Copy. One round, Willy Pete.
Sending it. Over.
That'll wake 'em up.
[explosion]
[roaring]
Oh, shit. Light 'em up!
Is Miranda here?
No. Thank God.
Where is she?
Sorry, I can't say.
Get a room.
What exactly are you doing
with this...
person?
Three minutes ago,
I was a pirate.
I'm making progress.
They have Cortana.
- The Covenant?
- [Halsey] I saw them take her.
A Sangheili and Makee.
[Marines shouting indistinctly]
Makee's dead.
Apparently not.
Corporal, get these people
on this ship.
Trying, sir.
Come on, come on, come on.
Come on!
Every second counts!
Come on, come on.
Faster! Come on, come on, guys!
Come on, come on, come on.
Is this the last shuttle?
Hear that?
Hear what?
What is that?
What are you doing?
[dramatic music rises, subsides]
[all yelling]
Go!
[Perez] Move out!
[gunfire]
[Marines shouting]
[Keyes, over radio]
This is Admiral Keyes.
Upper hangar is under attack
from multiple
Covenant units, over.
That transport's
full of civilians.
We'll buy you some time.
Cover on the way.
Move it!
- Move it!
Fire team in the middle!
[Marine] Come on, Marines!
You got this!
[shouting voice cries out]
[groans]
I'll take that.
[indistinct shouting]
Civilians are all
on board, sir.
Great.
[beeping]
Where are you going?
I'll be back.
Can you fly this thing?
Not without you on it, sir.
[Keyes] I'll be back!
[Marines shouting]
[Jackal snarling]
[growls and roars]
[speaking Sangheili]
[beeps]
[gas hissing]
[snarling]
We have to help him.
No. We can't.
[Halsey] Wait!
[Keyes, over comm]
Corporal Perez?
Yes, sir?
Punch it.
I can't do that, sir.
Yes.
You can.
[snarling]
[Halsey]
No! Let me go!
Jacob!
Get off of me!
[dramatic music]
[inhales deeply]
Got a light?
[sighs]
[Halsey]
Get out of my way!
[all scream]
[dramatic music]
[ship engine revving]
[man groans]
[Marine 1] I'm up.
[Marine 2] Form up!
[dramatic music]
[Halsey] Oh!
Oh.
[soft sobs]
[cries softly]
Go!
[indistinct shouts]
Breach!
[roars]
[Marine shouting indistinctly]
[strained screams]
[roars]
[both yelling]
[Jackals roaring]
[snarling]
Friend of yours?
[dramatic music]
[speaking Sangheili]
[grunts]
[John grunts]
[Vannak] Riz!
[growls]
[yells]
Chief!
[weapon powers down]
[whimpering]
[rasping growl]
[Makee, in Sangheili]
Stop.
Not yet.
[yelling]
[grunts]
No!
[low-key dramatic music]
[no audio]
[tragic music plays]
[somber music plays]